title: 'Summary: "Evolution of mutation rates in bacteria" (Denamur and Matic 2006)'
datetime: 2013-07-14 14:16:00 +2
tags: [evolution of the mutation rate]
category: [research, mutation rate]
math: false
cite: false

This is an "executive summary" of [Denamur and Matic [-@Denamur2006]](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2006.05150.x/abstract), which is a review of the literature on the evolution of the mutation rate in bactera.

1. Deleterious mutations are 100,000-fold more frequent than beneficial mutations in *E. coli*.
2. Mutators have been found in various species of bacteria in frequencies of 0.1-60%: 1% strong mutators, 10-30% weak mutators [@Matic1997; @Baquero2004]. 
1. These frequencies are higher than expected under a **mutation-selection balance** (MSB) - Boe *et al.* [-@Boe2000] estimated the mutator fraction at 0.00003.
3. Mutator alleles are mainly mutants in the **mismatch repair (MMR) system** (*mutS*, *mutL*) - see the article for more information on the operation of these genes and the MMR system).
4. Rate increases by these MMR mutants: **100-fold increase in transitions, 1,000-fold increase in frameshifts and 10-1,000-fold increase in chromosomal rearrangements**.
5. MMR mutatns arise by different mutation types. The rate of non-mutator to mutator was estimated by Boe *et al.* [-@Boe2000] to be 0.000005 per generation.
6. What can cause the frequency of MMR mutants to be higher than that expected under a MSB?
    - **Higher replication  rates** due to the absence of the metabolic load imposed by DNA repair enzymes[^1]
    - **Higher adaptation rate** due to the faster generation of beneficial mutations[^2]
7. **The first explanation was rejected**: Several studies found that **mutators are advanageous only when** the ratio of mutator to non-mutator is such that **beneficial mutations are more likely to be generated by mutators** than by non-mutators[^6].
8. The second explanation is stonger in bacteria than in other species because **recombination** rates are low and therefore mutators are not separated from the beneficial mutations they generate.
9. Although mutators can reach **high frequencies in adaptive evolution**, they accumulate deleterious mutations and **decline in frequency in a constant environment**.
10. **Migration** to new environments can change a beneficial mutation to neutral or deleterious.
11. Mutators are more vulnerable to **Muller's ratchet** due to faster accumulation of deleterious mutations [@Funchain2000].
12. Beneficial mutations can move to non-mutator background by horizontal gene transfer or back/compensatory mutation at the mutator locus.
13. **Local mutators** - DNA sequences that induce high mutation rates in their neighborhoods - were found in virulent loci.
12. There are over 20 loci associated with mutator phenotypes, probably with different direct effects on mutation rate and fitness and with different **pleiotropic effects** - for example, *mutT* increases the mutation and adaptation rate but also increases transcriptional error rate [@Taddei1997a].
13. MMR mutants are special because they also **increase recombination rates** which can help in adaptation [@Funchain2001]. High recombination rates can also help to restore non-mutator alleles after adaptation is complete[^3].
14. Most mutators were found in **pathogenic bacteria**.
15. Some mutators were correlated in natural populations with **antibiotic resistance**, however not strong mutators: the latter are probably counter-selected after adaptation and are therefore not found in natural population [@Taddei1997].




# References

[^1]: Cost of DNA replication fidelity [@Dawson1998]
[^2]: Second-order selection (for example, [@Leigh1973])
[^3]: Rise and fall of the mutator allele [@Taddei1997]
[^6]: But see [@Torres-Barcelo2013] which showed that *P. aeruginosa* mutators are oxidative-stress resistant 